At the sunset hour of one warm spring day two men were to be
seen at
Patriarch's Ponds. The first of them--aged about forty, dressed in a
greyish
summer suit--was short, dark-haired, well-fed and bald. He
carried his
decorous pork-pie hat by the brim and his neatly shaven face was
embellished
by black hornrimmed spectacles of preternatural dimensions. The
other, a
broad-shouldered young man with curly reddish hair and a check cap
pushed
back to the nape of his neck, was wearing a tartan shirt, chewed
white
trousers and black sneakers.
The first was none other than Mikhail Alexandrovich Berlioz,
editor of
a highbrow literary magazine and chairman of the management
cofnmittee of
one of the biggest Moscow literary clubs, known by its
abbreviation as
massolit; his young companion was the poet Ivan Nikolayich
Poniryov who
wrote under the pseudonym of Bezdomny.
Reaching the shade of the budding lime trees, the two writers
went
straight to a gaily-painted kiosk labelled'Beer and Minerals'.
There was an oddness about that terrible day in May which is
worth
recording : not only at the kiosk but along the whole avenue
parallel to
Malaya Bronnaya Street there was not a person to be seen. It was the
hour of
the day when people feel too exhausted to breathe, when Moscow glows
in a
dry haze as the sun disappears behind the Sadovaya Boulevard--yet no
one had
come out for a walk under the limes, no one was sitting on a
bench, the
avenue was empty.
'A glass of lemonade, please,'said Berlioz.
'There isn't any,'replied the woman in the kiosk. For some reason
the
request seemed to offend her.
'Got any beer?' enquired Bezdomny in a hoarse voice.
'Beer's being delivered later this evening' said the woman.
'Well what have you got?' asked Berlioz.
'Apricot juice, only it's warm' was the answer.
'All right, let's have some.'
The apricot juice produced a rich yellow froth, making the air
smell
like a hairdresser's. After drinking it the two writers immediately
began to
hiccup. They paid and sat down on a bench facing the pond, their
backs to
Bronnaya Street.Then occurred the second oddness, which affected
Berlioz
alone. He suddenly stopped hiccuping, his heart thumped and for a
moment
vanished, then returned but with a blunt needle sticking into
it. In
addition Berlioz was seized by a fear that was groundless but so
powerful
that he had an immediate impulse to run away from Patriarch's Ponds
without
looking back.
Berlioz gazed miserably about him, unable to say what had
frightened
him. He went pale, wiped his forehead with his handkerchief and
thought: '
What's the matter with me? This has never happened before. Heart
playing
tricks . . . I'm overstrained ... I think it's time to chuck
everything up
and go and take the waters at Kislovodsk. . . .'
Just then the sultry air coagulated and wove itself into the shape
of a
man--a transparent man of the strangest appearance. On his small head
was a
jockey-cap and he wore a short check bum-freezer made of air. The man
was
seven feet tall but narrow in the shoulders, incredibly thin and with a
face
made for derision.
Berlioz's life was so arranged that he was not accustomed to
seeing
unusual phenomena. Paling even more, he stared and thought in
consternation
: ' It can't be!'
But alas it was, and the tall, transparent gentleman was swaying
from
left to right in front of him without touching the ground.
Berlioz was so overcome with horror that he shut his eyes.
When he
opened them he saw that it was all over, the mirage had
dissolved, the
chequered figure had vanished and the blunt needle had
simultaneously
removed itself from his heart.
'The devil! ' exclaimed the editor. ' D'you know, Ivan, the
heat
nearly gave me a stroke just then! I even saw something like a
hallucination
. . . ' He tried to smile but his eyes were still blinking with fear
and his
hands trembled. However he gradually calmed down, flapped his
handkerchief
and with a brave enough ' Well, now. . . ' carried on the conversation
that
had been interrupted by their drink of apricot juice.
They had been talking, it seemed, about Jesus Christ. The fact was
that
the editor had commissioned the poet to write a long anti-religious
poem for
one of the regular issues of his magazine. Ivan Nikolayich had written
this
poem in record time, but unfortunately the editor did not care for
it at
all. Bezdomny had drawn the chief figure in his poem, Jesus, in very
black
colours, yet in the editor's opinion the whole poem had to be written
again.
And now he was reading Bezdomny a lecture on Jesus in order to
stress the
poet's fundamental error.
It was hard to say exactly what had made Bezdomny write
as he
had--whether it was his great talent for graphic description or
complete
ignorance of the subject he was writing on, but his Jesus had come
out,
well, completely alive, a Jesus who had really existed, although
admittedly
a Jesus who had every possible fault.
Berlioz however wanted to prove to the poet that the main object
was
not who Jesus was, whether he was bad or good, but that as a person
Jesus
had never existed at all and that all the stories about him were
mere
invention, pure myth.
The editor was a well-read man and able to make skilful
reference to
the ancient historians, such as the famous Philo of Alexandria
and the
brilliantly educated Josephus Flavius, neither of whom mentioned a
word of
Jesus' existence. With a display of solid erudition, Mikhail
Alexandrovich
informed the poet that incidentally, the passage in Chapter 44
of the
fifteenth book of Tacitus' Annals, where he describes the
execution of
Jesus, was nothing but a later forgery.
The poet, for whom everything the editor was saying was a
novelty,
listened attentively to Mikhail Alexandrovich, fixing him with his
bold
green eyes, occasionally hiccuping and cursing the apricot juice under
his
breath.
'There is not one oriental religion,' said Berlioz, ' in which
an
immaculate virgin does not bring a god into the world. And the
Christians,
lacking any originality, invented their Jesus in exactly the same
way. In
fact he never lived at all. That's where the stress has got to lie.
Berlioz's high tenor resounded along the empty avenue and as
Mikhail
Alexandrovich picked his way round the sort of historical pitfalls
that can
only be negotiated safely by a highly educated man, the poet learned
more
and more useful and instructive facts about the Egyptian god Osiris,
son of
Earth and Heaven, about the Phoenician god Thammuz, about Marduk and
even
about the fierce little-known god Vitzli-Putzli, who had once been
held in
great veneration by the Aztecs of Mexico. At the very moment when
Mikhail
Alexandrovich was telling the poet how the Aztecs used to model
figurines of
Vitzli-Putzli out of dough-- the first man appeared in the avenue.
Afterwards, when it was frankly too late, various bodies
collected
their data and issued descriptions of this man. As to his teeth, he
haid
platinum crowns on his left side and gold ones on his tight. He
wore an
expensive grey suit and foreign shoes of the same colour as his
suit. His
grey beret was stuck jauntily over one ear and under his arm he
carried a
walking-stick with a knob in the shape of a poodle's head. He
looked
slightly over forty. Crooked sort of mouth. Clean-shav-n. Dark hair.
Right
eye black, left ieye for some reason green. Eyebrows black, but one
higher
than the other. In short--a foreigner.
As he passed the bench occupied by the editor and the poet,
the
foreigner gave them a sidelong glance, stopped and suddenly sat down
on the
next bench a couple of paces away from the two friends.
'A German,'' thought Berlioz. ' An Englishman. ...' thought
Bezdomny.
' Phew, he must be hot in those gloves!'
The stranger glanced round the tall houses that formed a square
round
the pond, from which it was obvious that he seeing this locality
for the
first time and that it interested him. His gaze halted on the upper
storeys,
whose panes threw back a blinding, fragmented reflection of the sun
which
was setting on Mikhail Alexandrovich for ever ; he then looked
downwards to
where the windows were turning darker in the early evening twilight,
smiled
patronisingly at something, frowned, placed his hands on the knob
of his
cane and laid his chin on his hands.
'You see, Ivan,' said Berlioz,' you have written a
marvellously
satirical description of the birth of Jesus, the son of God, but the
whole
joke lies in the fact that there had already been a whole series of
sons of
God before Jesus, such as the Phoenician Adonis, the Phrygian Attis,
the
Persian Mithras. Of course not one of these ever existed, including
Jesus,
and instead of the nativity or the arrival of the Magi you should
have
described the absurd rumours about their arrival. But according to
your
story the nativity really took place! '
Here Bezdomny made an effort to stop his torturing hiccups and
held his
breath, but it only made him hiccup more loudly and painfully. At
that
moment Berlioz interrupted his speech because the foreigner suddenly
rose
and approached the two writers. They stared at him in astonishment.
'Excuse me, please,' said the stranger with a foreign accent,
although
in correct Russian, ' for permitting myself, without an introduction
. . .
but the subject of your learned conversation was so interesting that. .
.'
Here he politely took off his beret and the two friends
had no
alternative but to rise and bow.
'No, probably a Frenchman.. . .' thought Berlioz.
'A Pole,' thought Bezdomny.
I should add that the poet had found the stranger repulsive from
first
sight, although Berlioz had liked the look of him, or rather not
exactly
liked him but, well. . . been interested by him.
'May I join you? ' enquired the foreigner politely, and as the
two
friends moved somewhat unwillingly aside he adroitly placed himself
'between
them and at once joined the conversation. ' If I am not mistaken, you
were
saying that Jesus never existed, were you not? ' he asked, turning his
green
left eye on Berlioz.
'No, you were not mistaken,' replied Berlioz courteously. ' I
did
indeed say that.'
'Ah, how interesting! ' exclaimed the foreigner.
'What the hell does he want?' thought Bezdomny and frowned.
'And do you agree with your friend? ' enquired the unknown
man,
turning to Bezdomny on his right.
'A hundred per cent! ' affirmed the poet, who loved to use
pretentious
numerical expressions.
'Astounding! ' cried their unbidden companion. Glancing
furtively
round and lowering his voice he said : ' Forgive me for being so rude,
but
am I right in thinking that you do not believe in God either? ' He
gave a
horrified look and said: ' I swear not to tell anyone! '
'Yes, neither of us believes in God,' answered Berlioz with a
faint
smile at this foreign tourist's apprehension. ' But we can talk
about it
with absolute freedom.'
The foreigner leaned against the backrest of the bench and asked,
in a
voice positively squeaking with curiosity :
'Are you . . . atheists? '
'Yes, we're atheists,' replied Berlioz, smiling, and Bezdomny
thought
angrily : ' Trying to pick an argument, damn foreigner! '
'Oh, how delightful!' exclaimed the astonishing foreigner and
swivelled
his head from side to side, staring at each of them in turn.
'In our country there's nothing surprising about atheism,'
said
Berlioz with diplomatic politeness. ' Most of us have long ago and
quite
consciously given up believing in all those fairy-tales about God.'
At this the foreigner did an extraordinary thing--he stood up and
shook
the astonished editor by the hand, saying as he did so :
'Allow me to thank you with all my heart!'
'What are you thanking him for? ' asked Bezdomny, blinking.
'For some very valuable information, which as a traveller I
find
extremely interesting,' said the eccentric foreigner, raising his
forefinger
meaningfully.
This valuable piece of information had obviously made a
powerful
impression on the traveller, as he gave a frightened glance at the
houses as
though afraid of seeing an atheist at every window.
'No, he's not an Englishman,' thought Berlioz. Bezdomny thought:
'
What I'd like to know is--where did he manage to pick up such good
Russian?
' and frowned again.
'But might I enquire,' began the visitor from abroad after
some
worried reflection, ' how you account for the proofs of the
existence of
God, of which there are, as you know, five? '
'Alas! ' replied Berlioz regretfully. ' Not one of these
proofs is
valid, and mankind has long since relegated them to the archives. You
must
agree that rationally there can be no proof of the existence of God.'
'Bravo!' exclaimed the stranger. ' Bravo! You have exactly
repeated
the views of the immortal Emmanuel on that subject. But here's the
oddity of
it: he completely demolished all five proofs and then, as though to
deride
his own efforts, he formulated a sixth proof of his own.'
'Kant's proof,' objected the learned editor with a thin smile,
' is
also unconvincing. Not for nothing did Schiller say that Kant's
reasoning on
this question would only satisfy slaves, and Strauss simply laughed
at his
proof.'
As Berlioz spoke he thought to himself: ' But who on earth is
he? And
how does he speak such good Russian? '
'Kant ought to be arrested and given three years in Solovki asylum
for
that " proof " of his! ' Ivan Nikolayich burst out completely
unexpectedly.
'Ivan!' whispered Berlioz, embarrassed.
But the suggestion to pack Kant off to an asylum not only
did not
surprise the stranger but actually delighted him. ' Exactly, exactly!
' he
cried and his green left eye, turned on Berlioz glittered. ' That's
exactly
the place for him! I said to him myself that morning at breakfast:
" If
you'll forgive me, professor, your theory is no good. It may be
clever but
it's horribly incomprehensible. People will think you're mad." '
Berlioz's eyes bulged. ' At breakfast ... to Kant? What is he
rambling
about? ' he thought.
'But,' went on the foreigner, unperturbed by Berlioz's amazement
and
turning to the poet, ' sending him to Solovki is out of the
question,
because for over a hundred years now he has been somewhere far away
from
Solovki and I assure you that it is totally impossible to bring him
back.'
'What a pity!' said the impetuous poet.
'It is a pity,' agreed the unknown man with a glint in his eye,
and
went on: ' But this is the question that disturbs me--if there is no
God,
then who, one wonders, rules the life of man and keeps the world in
order? '
'Man rules himself,' said Bezdomny angrily in answer to such
an
obviously absurd question.
'I beg your pardon,' retorted the stranger quietly,' but to rule
one
must have a precise plan worked out for some reasonable period ahead.
Allow
me to enquire how man can control his own affairs when he is not
only
incapable of compiling a plan for some laughably short term, such as,
say, a
thousand years, but cannot even predict what will happen to him
tomorrow? '
'In fact,' here the stranger turned to Berlioz, ' imagine what
would
happen if you, for instance, were to start organising others and
yourself,
and you developed a taste for it--then suddenly you got. . . he, he
... a
slight heart attack . . . ' at this the foreigner smiled sweetly, as
though
the thought of a heart attack gave him pleasure. . . . ' Yes, a
heart
attack,' he repeated the word sonorously, grinning like a cat, ' and
that's
the end of you as an organiser! No one's fate except your own
interests you
any longer. Your relations start lying to you. Sensing that
something is
amiss you rush to a specialist, then to a charlatan, and even perhaps
to a
fortune-teller. Each of them is as useless as the other, as you
know
perfectly well. And it all ends in tragedy: the man who thought he
was in
charge is suddenly reduced to lying prone and motionless in a wooden
box and
his fellow men, realising that there is no more sense to be had of
him,
incinerate him.
'Sometimes it can be even worse : a man decides to go
to
Kislovodsk,'--here the stranger stared at Berlioz--' a trivial matter
you
may think, but he cannot because for no good reason he suddenly jumps
up and
falls under a tram! You're not going to tell me that he arranged to do
that
himself? Wouldn't it be nearer the truth to say that someone quite
different
was directing his fate?' The stranger gave an eerie peal of laughter.
Berlioz had been following the unpleasant story about the heart
attack
and the tram with great attention and some uncomfortable thoughts had
begun
to worry him. ' He's not a foreigner . . . he's not a
foreigner,' he
thought, ' he's a very peculiar character . . . but I ask you, who is
he? .
. . '
'I see you'd like to smoke,' said the stranger unexpectedly,
turning
to Bezdomny, ' what sort do you prefer? '
'Do you mean you've got different sorts? ' glumly asked the poet,
who
had run out of cigarettes.
'Which do you prefer? ' repeated the mysterious stranger.
'Well, then " Our Brand ",' replied Bezdomny, irritated.
The unknown man immediately pulled a cigarette case out of his
pocket
and offered it to Bezdomny.
• " Our Brand " . . .'
The editor and the poet were not so much surprised by the fact
that the
cigarette case actually contained ' Our Brand' as by the cigarette
case
itself. It was of enormous dimensions, made of solid gold and on the
inside
of the cover a triangle of diamonds flashed with blue and white fire.
Their reactions were different. Berlioz thought: ' No,
he's a
foreigner.' Bezdomny thought: ' What the hell is he . . .? '
The poet and the owner of the case lit their cigarettes and
Berlioz,
who did not smoke, refused.
'I shall refute his argument by saying' Berlioz decided to
himself, '
that of course man is mortal, no one will argue with that. But the
fact is
that . . .'
However he was not able to pronounce the words before the
stranger
spoke:
'Of course man is mortal, but that's only half the problem. The
trouble
is that mortality sometimes comes to him so suddenly! And he cannot
even say
what he will be doing this evening.'
'What a stupid way of putting the question. ' thought Berlioz
and
objected :
'Now there you exaggerate. I know more or less exactly what I'm
going
to be doing this evening. Provided of course that a brick doesn't fall
on my
head in the street. . .'
'A brick is neither here nor there,' the stranger
interrupted
persuasively. ' A brick never falls on anyone's head. You in
particular, I
assure you, are in no danger from that. Your death will be different.'
'Perhaps you know exactly how I am going to die? ' enquired
Berlioz
with understandable sarcasm at the ridiculous turn that the
conversation
seemed to be taking. ' Would you like to tell me?'
'Certainly,' rejoined the stranger. He looked Berlioz up and down
as
though he were measuring him for a suit and muttered through his
teeth
something that sounded like : ' One, two . . . Mercury in the second
house .
. . the moon waning . . . six-- accident . . . evening--seven . . . '
then
announced loudly and cheerfully : ' Your 'head will be cut off!'
Bezdomny turned to the stranger with a wild, furious stare and
Berlioz
asked with a sardonic grin :
'By whom? Enemies? Foreign spies? '
'No,' replied their companion, ' by a Russian woman, a member of
the
Komsomol.'
'Hm,' grunted Berlioz, upset by the foreigner's little joke. '
That,
if you don'c mind my saying so, is most improbable.'
'I beg your pardon,' replied the foreigner, ' but it is so. Oh
yes, I
was going to ask you--what are you doing this evening, if it's not a
secret?
'
'It's no secret. From here I'm going home, and then at ten
o'clock
this evening there's a meeting at the massolit and I shall be in the
chair.'
'No, that is absolutely impossible,' said the stranger firmly.
'Why?'
'Because,' replied the foreigner and frowned up at the sky
where,
sensing the oncoming cool of the evening, the birds were flying to
roost, '
Anna has already bought the sunflower-seed oil, in fact she has not
only
bought it, but has already spilled it. So that meeting will not take
place.'
With this, as one might imagine, there was silence beneath the
lime
trees.
'Excuse me,' said Berlioz after a pause with a glance at
the
stranger's jaunty beret, ' but what on earth has sunflower-seed oil
got to
do with it... and who is Anna? '
'I'll tell you what sunflower-seed oil's got to do with it,'
said
Bezdomny suddenly, having obviously decided to declare war on
their
uninvited companion. ' Have you, citizen, ever had to spend any time
in a
mental hospital? '
'Ivan! ' hissed Mikhail Alexandrovich.
But the stranger was not in the least offended and gave a
cheerful
laugh. ' Yes, I have, I have, and more than once! ' he exclaimed
laughing,
though the stare that he gave the poet was mirthless. ' Where
haven't I
been! My only regret is that I didn't stay long enough to ask the
professor
what schizophrenia was. But you are going to find that out
from him
yourself, Ivan Nikolayich!'
'How do you know my name? '
'My dear fellow, who doesn't know you? ' With this the
foreigner
pulled the previous day's issue of The Literary Gazette out of his
pocket
and Ivan Nikolayich saw his own picture on the front page above some
of his
own verse. Suddenly what had delighted him yesterday as proof of his
fame
and popularity no longer gave the poet any pleasure at all.
'I beg your pardon,' he said, his face darkening. ' Would you
excuse
us for a minute? I should like a word or two with my friend.'
'Oh, with pleasure! ' exclaimed the stranger. ' It's so
delightful
sitting here under the trees and I'm not in a hurry to go anywhere,
as it
happens.'
'Look here, Misha,' whispered the poet when he had drawn
Berlioz
aside. ' He's not just a foreign tourist, he's a spy. He's a Russian
emigre
and he's trying to catch us out. Ask him for his papers and then
he'll go
away . . .'
'Do you think we should? ' whispered Berlioz anxiously,
thinking to
himself--' He's right, of course . . .'
'Mark my words,' the poet whispered to him. ' He's pretending to
be an
idiot so that he can trap us with some compromising question. You can
hear
how he speaks Russian,' said the poet, glancing sideways and watching
to see
that the stranger was not eavesdropping. ' Come on, let's arrest
him and
then we'll get rid of him.'
The poet led Berlioz by the arm back to the bench.
The unknown man was no longer sitting on it but standing
beside it,
holding a booklet in a dark grey binding, a fat envelope made of good
paper
and a visiting card.
'Forgive me, but in the heat of our argument I forgot to
introduce
myself. Here is my card, my passport and a letter inviting me to
come to
Moscow for consultations,' said the stranger gravely, giving both
writers a
piercing stare.
The two men were embarrassed. ' Hell, he overheard us . . . '
thought
Berlioz, indicating with a polite gesture that there was no need for
this
show of documents. Whilst the stranger was offering them to the
editor, the
poet managed to catch sight of the visiting card. On it in foreign
lettering
was the word ' Professor ' and the initial letter of a surname which
began
with a'W'.
'Delighted,' muttered the editor awkwardly as the foreigner put
his
papers back into his pocket. Good relations having been reestablished,
all
three sat down again on the bench.
'So you've been invited here as a consultant, have you,
professor? '
asked Berlioz.
'Yes, I have.'
'Are you German? ' enquired Bezdomny.
'I? ' rejoined the professor and thought for a moment. '
Yes, I
suppose I am German. . . . ' he said.
'You speak excellent Russian,' remarked Bezdomny.
'Oh, I'm something of a polyglot. I know a great number of
languages,'
replied the professor.
'And what is your particular field of work? ' asked Berlioz.
'I specialise in black magic.'
'Like hell you do! . . . ' thought Mikhail Alexandrovich.
'And ... and you've been invited here to give advice on that? '
he
asked with a gulp.
'Yes,' the professor assured him, and went on : ' Apparently
your
National Library has unearthed some original manuscripts of
the
ninth-century necromancer Herbert Aurilachs. I have been asked to
decipher
them. I am the only specialist in the world.'
'Aha! So you're a historian? ' asked Berlioz in a tone of
considerable
relief and respect.
' Yes, I am a historian,' adding with apparently
complete
inconsequence, ' this evening a historic event is going to take place
here
at Patriarch's Ponds.'
Again the editor and the poet showed signs of utter amazement,
but the
professor beckoned to them and when both had bent their heads towards
him he
whispered :
'Jesus did exist, you know.'
'Look, professor,' said Berlioz, with a forced smile, ' With
all
respect to you as a scholar we take a different attitude on that
point.'
'It's not a question of having an attitude,' replied the
strange
professor. ' He existed, that's all there is to it.'
'But one must have some proof. . . . ' began Berlioz.
'There's no need for any proof,' answered the professor. In a
low
voice, his foreign accent vanishing altogether, he began :
'It's very simple--early in the morning on the fourteenth of
the
spring month of Nisan the Procurator of Judaea, Pontius Pilate, in a
white
cloak lined with blood-red...